RFC-0172 - Technical Editing (#554)
tari-project/tari: RFC/src/RFC-0172_PeerToPeerMessagingProtocol.md

| -------- | ----- | --------------- | --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| identity | 0     | 8               | `[u8;8]`  | The identifier that a `ZMQ_ROUTER` socket expects so that it knows the intended destination of the message. This can be thought of as a session token. |
| version  | 1     | 1               | `u8`      | The wire protocol version.                                                                                                                             |
| header   | 2     | Varies          | `Vec<u8>` | Serialized bytes of data containing an unencrypted [MessageEnvelopeHeader].                                                                                      |
| body     | 3     | Varies          | `Vec<u8>` | Serialized bytes of data containing an unencrypted or encrypted [MessageEnvelopeBody].                                                                      |

The header and decrypted body MUST be deserializable as per [RFC-0171: MessageSerialization](RFC-0171_MessageSerialisation.md).

#### MessageEnvelopeHeader

> Every [MessageEnvelope] MUST have an unencrypted header containing the following fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every MessageEnvelope MUST have an unencrypted header containing the following fields:
```

> 

Reviewer: Please remove square brackets here:
`A MessageEnvelopeBody is the payload of the [MessageEnvelope]. A [MessageEnvelopeBody] may be encrypted as required.` 
to
`A MessageEnvelopeBody is the payload of the MessageEnvelope. A MessageEnvelopeBody may be encrypted as required.`

#### MessageType

> An enumeration of the messages that are part of the Tari network. [MessageType]s are represented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An enumeration of the messages that are part of the Tari network. MessageTypes are represented
```

> as an unsigned eight-bit integer and each value must be mapped to a corresponding [Message] struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as an unsigned eight-bit integer and each value must be mapped to a corresponding Message struct.
```

> All [MessageType]s fall within a particular numerical range according to the message's concern:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All MessageTypes fall within a particular numerical range according to the message's concern:
```

| Category     | Range   | # Message Types | Description                                                  |
| ------------ | ------- | --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `reserved`     | 0       | 1               | Reserved for control messages such as `Ack`.                  |
| `net`        | 1-32    | 32              | Network-related messages such as `join` and `discover`.       |
| `peer`       | 33-64   | 32              | Peer connection messages, such as `establish connection`.     |
| `blockchain` | 65-96   | 32              | Messages related to the blockchain, such as `add block`.      |
| `vn`         | 97-224  | 128             | Messages related to the validator nodes, such as `execute instruction`. |
| `extended`   | 225-255 | 30              | Reserved for future use.                                      |

> In documentation, [MessageType]s can be referred to by the category and name. For example, `peer::EstablishConnection` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In documentation, MessageTypes can be referred to by the category and name. For example, `peer::EstablishConnection` and
```

#### InboundConnection

A thin wrapper around a `ZMQ_ROUTER` socket, which binds to a [NetAddress] and accepts incoming multipart messages.
This connection blocks until there is data to read, or a timeout is reached. In both cases, the `receive` method
can be called again (i.e. in a loop) to continue listening for messages. Client code should run this loop in its own thread.
`send` is only called (if at all) in response to an incoming message.

Fields may include

> - a [NetAddress];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a NetAddress;
```

An InboundConnection:

- MUST perform the "server-side" [CurveZMQ](http://curvezmq.org/page:read-the-docs) encryption protocol if encryption is set.
  - Using [ZeroMQ]. this means setting the socketopts `ZMQ_CURVE_SERVER` to 1 and `ZMQ_CURVE_SECRETKEY` to the secret key before binding.
- MUST listen for and accept TCP connections.

>   - For an IP [NetAddress], bind on the given host IP and port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For an IP NetAddress, bind on the given host IP and port.
```

>   - For an Onion [NetAddress], bind on 127.0.0.1 and the given port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For an Onion NetAddress, bind on 127.0.0.1 and the given port.
```

>   - For an I2P [NetAddress], as yet undetermined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For an I2P NetAddress, as yet undetermined.
```

- MUST read multipart messages and return them to the caller.
  - If the timeout is reached, return an error to be handled by the calling code.

#### OutboundConnection

A thin wrapper around a `ZMQ_DEALER` socket, which connects to a [NetAddress] and sends outbound multipart messages.
This connection blocks until data can be written, or a timeout is reached. The timeout should never be reached, as
[ZeroMQ] internally queues messages to be sent.

Fields may include:

> - a [NetAddress];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a NetAddress;
```

> An [OutboundConnection]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An OutboundConnection:
```

- MUST perform the "client-side" [CurveZMQ](http://curvezmq.org/page:read-the-docs) encryption protocol if encryption is set.

>   - Using [ZeroMQ], this means setting the socketopts `ZMQ_CURVE_SERVERKEY`, `ZMQ_CURVE_SECRETKEY` and `ZMQ_CURVE_PUBLICKEY`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Using ZeroMQ, this means setting the socketopts `ZMQ_CURVE_SERVERKEY`, `ZMQ_CURVE_SECRETKEY` and `ZMQ_CURVE_PUBLICKEY`.
```

- MUST connect to a TCP endpoint.

>   - For an IP [NetAddress], connect to the given host IP and port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For an IP NetAddress, connect to the given host IP and port.
```

>   - For an Onion [NetAddress], connect to the onion address using the TCP, e.g. `tcp://xyz...123.onion:1234`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For an Onion NetAddress, connect to the onion address using the TCP, e.g. `tcp://xyz...123.onion:1234`.
```

>   - For an I2P [NetAddress], as yet undetermined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For an I2P NetAddress, as yet undetermined.
```

> - MUST write the parts of the given [MessageEnvelope] to the socket as a multipart message consisting of, in order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST write the parts of the given MessageEnvelope to the socket as a multipart message consisting of, in order:
```

  - identity;
  - version;
  - header;
  - body.

> - If specified, MUST set a High Water Mark (HWM) on the underlying [ZeroMQ] socket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If specified, MUST set a High Water Mark (HWM) on the underlying ZeroMQ socket.
```

- If the HWM is reached, a call to `send` MUST return an error and any messages received SHOULD be discarded.

#### Peer

A single peer that can communicate on the Tari network.

Fields may include:

- `addresses` - a list of [NetAddress]es associated with the peer, perhaps accompanied by some bookkeeping metadata, such 
as preferred address;
- `node_type` - the type of node or client, i.e. [BaseNode], [ValidatorNode], [Wallet] or [TokenWallet]);
- `last_seen` - a timestamp of the last time a message has been sent/received from this peer;
- `flags` - 8-bit flag;
  - bit 0: is_banned,
  - bit 1-7: reserved.

A peer may also contain reputation metrics (e.g. rejected_message_count, avg_latency) to be used to decide
if a peer should be banned. This mechanism is yet to be decided.

#### PeerConnection

Represents direct bidirectional connection to another node or client. As connections are bidirectional,

> the [PeerConnection] need only hold a single [InboundConnection] or [OutboundConnection], depending on if the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the PeerConnection need only hold a single [InboundConnection] or [OutboundConnection], depending on if the
```

node requested a peer connect to it or if it is connecting to a peer.

PeerConnection will send messages to the peer in a non-blocking, asynchronous manner as long as the connection
is maintained.

It has a few important functions:

- managing the underlying network connections, with automatic reconnection if necessary;
- forwarding incoming messages onto the given handler socket; and
- sending outgoing messages.

> Unlike [InboundConnection] and [OutboundConnection], which are essentially stateless,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike InboundConnection and OutboundConnection, which are essentially stateless,
```

A `PeerConnection`:

> - MUST listen for data on the given [NetAddress] using an [InboundConnection];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST listen for data on the given [NetAddress] using an InboundConnection;
```

> - MUST sequentially try to connect to one of the peer's [NetAddress]es until one succeeds or all fail using an [OutboundConnection];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST sequentially try to connect to one of the peer's NetAddresses until one succeeds or all fail using an OutboundConnection;
```

> - MUST immediately reject and dispose of a multipart message not consisting of four parts, as detailed in [MessageEnvelope];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST immediately reject and dispose of a multipart message not consisting of four parts, as detailed in MessageEnvelope;
```

> - MUST construct a [MessageEnvelope] from the multiple parts;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST construct a MessageEnvelope from the multiple parts;
```

> - MUST pass the constructed [MessageEnvelope] to the message handler;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST pass the constructed MessageEnvelope to the message handler;
```

- MUST transition to `Connecting` state and retry the connection, should a connection drop;
- MUST send a `net::Disconnect` message and drop the connection when a shutdown signal is received.

#### ConnectionManager

The ConnectionManager manages a set of live PeerConnections. It provides an abstraction for other components
to initiate and use PeerConnections without having to worry about attaching the new PeerConnection to message handlers.

It consists of a list of active peer connections and an `inproc` message handler socket. This socket is 'written to' whenever
a message is received from any active [PeerConnection] for other components to act on.

Methods may include:

- `establish_connection(Peer)` - create and return a new PeerConnection;
- `disconnect(peer)` - disconnect a particular peer;
- `suspend()` - temporarily suspend connections;
- `resume()` - temporarily suspend connections;
- `shutdown` - cleanly shut down all PeerConnections.

The `ConnectionManager`:

> - MUST call `suspend` on every [PeerConnection] if its `suspend` method is called;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST call `suspend` on every PeerConnection if its `suspend` method is called;
```

> - MUST call `resume` on every [PeerConnection] if its `resume` method is called;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST call `resume` on every PeerConnection if its `resume` method is called;
```

> - MUST call `shutdown` on every [PeerConnection] if its `shutdown` method is called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST call `shutdown` on every PeerConnection if its `shutdown` method is called
```

> - MUST create a new [PeerConnection] with the given Peer and NetAddress, when `establish_connection` is called;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST create a new PeerConnection with the given Peer and NetAddress, when `establish_connection` is called;
```

> - MUST call `shutdown` on the [PeerConnection] and remove the connection for the given peer, when `disconnect(peer)` is called;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MUST call `shutdown` on the PeerConnection and remove the connection for the given peer, when `disconnect(peer)` is called;
```

The control service accepts a single message:

- `peer::EstablishConnection(pk, curve_pk, net_address)`.

A ControlService:

- MUST listen for connections on a predefined CONTROL PORT;
- SHOULD deny connections from banned peers.

The steps to establish a peer connection are as follows:

Alice wants to connect to Bob

1. Alice creates a `PeerConnection` to which Bob can connect.
   - A new CURVE key pair is generated.
2. Alice connects to Bob's control server and Bob accepts the connection.
3. Alice sends a `peer::establish_connection` message, with:
   - the CURVE public key for the socket connection;
   - the node's public key corresponding to its [Node ID]; and
   - the [NetAddress] of the new PeerConnection.
4. Bob accepts this request and opens a new `PeerConnnection` socket using Alice's CURVE public key.

> 5. Bob connects to the given [NetAddress] and sends a `peer::establish_connection` message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Bob connects to the given NetAddress and sends a `peer::establish_connection` message.
```

In particular, it is responsible for:

- serializing the message body;

> - constructing the [MessageEnvelope];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- constructing the MessageEnvelope;
```

Each [communication node] MUST allocate some disk space for storage of messages for offline recipients.
Only some whitelisted MessageTypes are permitted to be stored. A sender sends a message destined for a particular
[node ID] to its closest peers, which forward the message to their closest peers, and so on.

Eventually, the message will reach nodes that either know the destination or are very close to the destination.
These nodes MUST store the message in some pending message bucket for the destination. The maximum number of
buckets and the size of each bucket SHOULD be sufficiently large as to be unlikely to overflow, but not so
large as to approach disk space problems. Individual messages should be small and responsibilities for
storage spread over the entire network.

> A [communication node]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A communication node
```

- MUST store messages for later retransmission, if all of the following conditions are true:
  - the MessageType is permitted to be stored;
  - there are fewer than $n$ closer online peers to the destination.
- MUST retransmit pending messages when a closer peer comes online or is added to the routing table.
- MAY remove a bucket, in any of the following conditions:
  - The bucket is empty;
  - A configured maximum number of buckets has been reached. Discard the bucket with the earliest creation timestamp.
  - The number of closer online peers to the destination is equal to or has exceeded $n$.
- MAY expire individual messages after a sufficiently long Time to Live (TTL)

This approach has the following benefits:

- When a destination comes online, it will receive pending messages without having to query them.
- The "closer within a threshold" metric is simple.
- Messages are stored on multiple peers, which makes it less likely for messages to disappear as nodes come and go
  (depending on threshold $n$).

### Queue Overflow Strategy

> Inbound/OutboundConnections (and therefore PeerConnection) have a High-water Mark (HWM) set.

Author: Hi Hansie, it should be '... have an HWM set.'

> Inbound/OutboundConnections (and therefore PeerConnection) have a High-water Mark (HWM) set.

Reviewer: Updated, thanks

> Inbound/OutboundConnections (and therefore PeerConnection) have a High-water Mark (HWM) set.

Author: ```suggestion
Inbound/OutboundConnections (and therefore PeerConnection) have an HWM set.
```

[communication node]: Glossary.md#communication-node
[connectioncontext]: #connectioncontext
[controlservice]: #controlservice
[duplicatemessagewindow]: #duplicatemessagewindow
[inboundconnection]: #inboundconnection
[message]: #message

> [MessageEnvelope]: #MessageEnvelope

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
